Communication of Prospective Teachers with Students in Mathematics 
Learning at Senior High School (SMA) 
Dian Kurniawan, Ipung Yuwono, Edy Bambang Irawan, Hery Susanto, Subanji, Susiswo. 
Mathematics Education Department, Faculty of Post Graduate, State University of Malang, Indonesia. 
e-mail: dian.kurniawan@unsil.ac.id  
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This study aims to describe the communication of prospective teachers in learning mathematics. The 
research was conducted in SMAN 1 Madura. The subject of this research is PLP student from Mathematics 
Education Study Program of Madura University. The prospective teacher's math learning is using the concept 
of function limits and the derivative of functions in problem-solving (Calculus). This research is descriptive 
qualitative research. Instruments in the study were interviews, field notes, and video recordings. The 
knowledge of prospective mathematics teacher in field practice involves communication in factual, 
conceptual, procedural, and metacognitive knowledge in facts, concepts, principles, procedures, and 
reasoning. Teacher communication plays a role in learning mathematics, especially the ability to use 
formulas, rules, and methods simultaneously correctly to make accurate calculations. Prospective teachers 
are able to provide guidance to their students when implementing mathematics lessons and when working 
on the blackboard, directing discussions and frequently asked questions, using language appropriate to the 
level of students' understanding so that the symbols, procedures, and strategies described can be well 
understood by the students. Factors that are considered important to be considered in the learning of 
mathematics in an effort to develop the skills of prospective teachers so that students are accustomed to 
facing similar problems, and apply a mathematical procedure in a newly encountered context. The result of 
this research is expected for prospective mathematics teacher to master communication in learning 
mathematics. The communication of prospective teachers in mathematics learning can be applied in other 
wider aspects. 
Keywords: Communication, Prospective teachers, and Mathematics learning. 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Knowledge of teachers in mathematics subjects needs to be improved through research. The research was conducted 
in order to develop the knowledge of mathematics teachers on the aspects of teaching and learning. Research is carried 
out in support of changes in the conception of teachers, teachers' beliefs about their profession, knowledge of their 
students, curriculum or teaching strategies used, subjects and information submitted by teachers so that teachers need 
to prepare the material beforehand so that the delivery of accepted teaching facts is acceptable. 
(Ball & McDiarmid, 1990)  points out: "Basic notes and tricks, and definitions do not find meaningful understanding.", 
Basic and secondary education has difficulty remembering ideas and procedures so that many do not understand the 
conceptual understanding of the mathematics they have learned and when delivered. Therefore, teachers should master 
the aspects of mathematical knowledge well. Aspects The mathematical knowledge that must be mastered involves 
more detailed conceptual knowledge, the mastery of definitions, conventions (changes), and procedures, finding 
patterns, conjectures, justifying statements and proving solutions, then seeking generalizations. 
The teacher is a professional in his position as an educator. Practical experience in learning required prospective 
teachers in improving their ability as a prospective educator. (Canrinus, Helms-Lorenz, Beijaard, Buitink, & Hofman, 
2011) describe the professional identity of teachers in this regard relating to sustained interpretation and interaction in 
the context of learning, teachers, commitment to work, changes in confidence and motivation. Learning practices 
provide useful opportunities to support the growth and development of math or prospective teachers (Amador, 2017). 

The knowledge of mathematics prospective teacher is limited mainly because it is based on their experience as 
students. A prospective teacher must be competent in order to foster students' beliefs so they can receive mathematical 
material that they learn well. Student confidence will grow if communication between teachers and students in depth 
in the process of mathematics education is well established. 
Growth and development of mathematics skills of prospective teachers have an influence in learning. (Hall, 2014) 
explains that teacher influences play a role in learning, such as: (1) tend to be energetic, passionate, caring and flexible; 
(2) sensitive to individual needs and student motivation; (3) enthusiastic and passionate about their teaching subject; 
and (4) concerned with the value of each student as a person. (Olteanu, 2015) illustrates five teacher approaches to 
grow and develop as teachers: (1) teachers are meant to develop abilities in the subject matter he taught; (2) master 
learning strategy; (3) teachers are skilled in delivering the subject matter; (4) effective in teaching; and (5) effective 
in facilitating student learning. 
Learning is done in order to facilitate students to build new knowledge from previous experience and knowledge. 
Knowledge is built on regular learning, (Sriraman, n.d.) argues that "when students are given what they are given an 
opportunity to learn.", When students are given the opportunity to learn through their learning activities will receive 
the transfer of knowledge provided by the teacher, in which case the teacher facilitates the students to gain new 
knowledge through the learning activities undertaken, and when repetition of the information is delivered either 
through the assignment, training, and subsequent learning then they will apply prior knowledge. (Sub-county, 2016) 
affirms that learning is an active process that involves discussion and allows students to reach their own conclusion 
goals. 
Lessons learned should receive feedback from students. This is done through question and answer activities in class 
and assignment or training, usually with the help of textbooks or textbooks that have been used as a reference in 
learning. In this feedback activity, communication will occur between teachers and students in the form of oral and 
written communication. Communication in the form of oral discourse and student writing should not be 
underestimated. (Pourdavood & Wachira, 2015) explains that the discourse of oral and written communications in the 
classroom meets three broad and interrelated issues of learning, teaching and assessment purposes. 
Learning objectives, Teaching, and Assessment in the form of Oral and Observational communication observed 
involve observations between the Teacher and students, fellow students, and individual students themselves. (Sür & 
Delice, 2016) suggest a mathematical communication process evaluated according to individual relationships with 
each other in a classroom environment, observed observational data and consequently there are three types emerging; 
1. Communication process conducted by students and teachers (Teacher Communication to Students). 
2. Communication process of students appears each other (Student to student communication). 
3. The process of communication that students do with themselves (Internal Communication students). 
Evaluation is done depending on the content of the teaching, among others the grouping of objects, which form the 
mathematical symbolic structure when mathematical communication is used, the communication process occurring in 
oral statements, there is a situation that oral statements support mathematical objects. Mathematical objects are used 
in written communication, verbal descriptions of verbal communication. The results of observation of researchers 
when guiding Field Activity Practices (PLP) prospective Teachers at the University of Siliwangi Tasikmalaya showed 
one mathematical object in the mathematics learning in the form of skills of the procedures in learning mathematics 
still have shortcomings especially this is because Candidate Teachers often use algorithm procedures incomplete 
meaning steps - the process of solving the problem often uses a less raw way quickly. This is in accordance with the 
National Assessment of Educational Progress (Ball & McDiarmid, 1990) that students are able to perform routine 
arithmetic calculations, but many have difficulty with reasonably complex procedures and reasoning. 
(Level & Teachers, 2003) describes communication requiring greater attention to mathematics education especially in 
written and oral communication. Students at all grade levels are able to express written and oral communication in 
order to organize and consolidate their mathematical thinking through communication; communicating their 
mathematical thoughts coherently and clearly to peers, teachers, and others; analyze and evaluate the mathematical 
thinking and strategies of others; and use mathematical language to express mathematical ideas appropriately. 
Communication is an integral part of the classroom and school processes, and the quality of communication affects 

the quality of teaching and learning of mathematics.(Olteanu, 2015). 
The Competency Standards of Primary and Secondary Education graduates in the Regulation of the Minister of 
Education and Culture No. 20 of 2016 explain that teachers should have factual, conceptual, procedural, and 
metacognitive knowledge at the technical, specific, detailed and complex levels regarding science, technology, art, 
culture, and humanities. Procedural Knowledge: Technical and Specific Knowledge, Details and Complex with respect 
to science, technology, art, and culture related to society and surrounding natural environment, nation, country, 
regional, and international. Conceptual Knowledge: Terminology / terminology and classification, categories, 
principles, generalizations, theories, models, and structures used in connection with technical and specific knowledge, 
detailed and complex with respect to science, technology, art and culture related to society and the natural environment 
around, nation, state, regional, and international. Procedural Knowledge is Knowledge of how to do things or activities 
related to technical knowledge, specific, algorithms, methods, and criteria to determine appropriate procedures with 
regard to science, technology, art and culture, related to society and the natural environment, , country, regional, and 
international. 
(“(Mathematics Education Library 10) Alan J. Bishop, Stieg Mellin-Olsen (auth.), Alan J. Bishop, Stieg Mellin-Olsen, 
Joop Van Dormolen (eds.)-Mathematic.pdf,” n.d.) describes the teaching of mathematics, "teaching of mathematics, 
many different things have been systematically scrutinized, and for the many different purposes, and as the teaching 
of mathematics is a very complicated matter. ". Mathematics teaching has many different things and is systematic to 
be studied, with a variety of purposes, as a very complicated problem, and always has a lot to do. Therefore, in this 
case, the researchers took the title "Communication Prospective Teachers with Students in Mathematics Learning in 
Senior High School (SMA)". 
 
2. METHOD  
This research is a qualitative descriptive research. (Creswell, 2009) Data collection techniques conducted in the form 
of field notes, interviews, documentation, and video recording. 
 
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
(Wood, 2012) suggests communication in mathematics learning, one of which is oral communication, presentation of 
material, that is how to speak in semi-formal form and processing Mathematics idea with a combination of listening 
and speaking. (Education, 2015) revealed that most teachers believe that success in mathematics means the ability to 
use formulas, rules, and methods simultaneously correctly to make accurate calculations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1. Prospective Teacher learning activities. 
Prospective teachers appear to have good skills in using formulas, rules, and methods simultaneously 
correctly to make accurate calculations with Competency Standards using the concept of function limits and 
function derivatives in problem-solving (Calculus). Prospective teachers communicate in writing while 
working on questions on the board and explain graphics or drawings. 
 

Prospective teachers are able to coach students while performing mathematics lessons and while working on 
problems on the board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2. Prospective teacher tutoring in working on a problem. 
(Guveli, 2015) argues that teachers are people who develop, direct, motivate themselves, develop and practice 
activities, examine, make students ask and think, listen, work together and evaluate. Coaching prospective teachers in 
learning is a means of developing student skills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3. An activity describes prospective teachers. 
Prospective teachers use good language when explaining the subject matter so as to adjust to the level of student 
understanding so that the symbols, procedures, and strategies described can be understood by the students. This shows 
the teachers are skilled in delivering the subject matter. 
Communication of prospective teachers is able to stimulate students to be active in the discussion so that good 
cooperation between students in the discussion process. This is a skill that must be mastered by prospective teachers 
in implementing learning effectively. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.4. Discussion activities. 
 
 

Prospective teachers are able to direct the question and answer activities with their students so as to establish good 
communication between prospective teachers and students. This helps the students accept the concept of the subject 
matter better. Prospective teachers are effective in facilitating student learning. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.5. Teacher question and answer activities students 
 
4. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Conclusion 
1. Teacher communication plays a role in learning mathematics especially the ability to use formulas, rules, 
and methods simultaneously correctly to make accurate calculations. 
2. Prospective teachers are able to conduct guidance to their students when implementing mathematics 
learning and when working on the problem on the blackboard. 
3. The language used by the prospective teacher can be adjusted to the level of student's understanding so 
that the symbols, procedures, and strategies described can be well understood by the students. 
4. Prospective teachers are able to direct discussion and question and answer activities well. 
5. Factors that are considered important to be considered in the learning of mathematics in an effort to 
develop the skills of prospective teachers so that students are accustomed to facing similar problems, 
and apply a mathematical procedure in a newly encountered context. 
Suggestions 
1. Prospective teachers master communication in learning mathematics. 
2. Communication of prospective teachers in learning mathematics can be applied in other aspects of a 
wider 
REFERENCES 
Amador, J. M. (2017). Preservice teachers’ video simulations and subsequent noticing: a practice-based 
method to prepare mathematics teachers. Research In Mathematics Education, 2017. 
Bishop, 
A.J., 
Mellin-Olsen, 
S., 
dan 
Dormolen, 
J.V. 
(1991). 
Mathematical 
Knowledge: Its Growth Through Teaching. Springer-Science+Business Media, B.V. 
Bryant, A. (2017). Grounded Theory and Grounded Theorizing, Pragmatism In Research Practice. Oxford 
University Press. 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America. 
Canrinus, E.T., Helms‐Lorenz, M., Beijaard, D., Buitink, J., & Hofman, A. (2011). Profiling teachers’ sense 
of professional identity. Educational Studies. Vol. 37, No. 5, December 2011, 593–608. 
Creswell, J.W. (2013). Research Design Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed methods approaches. Third Edition. 
Sage. London. 

Griffith, R., Groulx, J,. Profile for Teacher Decision Making: A Closer Look at Beliefs and Practice. Journal 
of Research in Education. Volume 24, Number 2. Fall and Winter 2014.  
Guveli, E. (2015). Prospective Elementary Mathematics Teachers’ Problem Posing Skills about Absolute 
Value. Turkish Journal of Teacher Education, 2015 Volume (issue) 4(1): 1-17. 
Kline, 
S.L. 
 
dan 
Ishii, 
D. 
K. 
(2008). 
Procedural 
Explanations 
in Mathematics Writing: A Framework for Understanding College Students’ Effective Communication 
Practices. Written Communication. Volume 25 Number 4. October 2008 441-461. 
Köğce, D. (2015). Conceptions and Concept Images of Prospective Mathematics Teachers in a Teacher 
Training Program Regarding Basic Mathematical Concepts. International J. Soc. Sci. & Education 2015 
Vol. 5 Issue 4, ISSN: 2223-4934 E and 2227 - 393X Print. 
NCTM. (2003). NCATE/NCTM Program Standards (2003) Programs for Initial Preparation of Mathematics 
Teachers. Available : http://www.nctm.org/ 
Olteanu, L. (2015). Construction of tasks in order to develop and promote classroom communication in 
mathematics. International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 2015. Vol. 
46, No. 2, 250–263. 
Pourdavood, Roland G. & Wachira, P. (2015). Importance of Mathematical Communication and Discourse in 
Secondary Classrooms. Global Journals Inc. (USA). Type: Double Blind Peer Reviewed International 
Research Journal. Volume 15 Issue 10 Version 1.0 the year 2015. 
Sriraman, B. and Lee, K.H.  (2011), The Elements of Creativity and Giftedness in Mathematics. 193–215. 
2011. Sense Publishers.  
Sür, Büşra. & Delice, Ali. (2016). The examination of the teacher-student communication process in the 
classroom: mathematical communication process model. SHS Web of Conferences 26, 01059 (2016). 
DOI: 10.1051/shsconf/20162601059. E RPA2015. 
Vale, I and Barbosa, A. (2017). The Importance of Seeing in Mathematics Communication. Journal of the 
European Teacher Education Network. 2017, Vol. 12, 49-63. 
Wood, L. N. (2012). Practice and conceptions: communicating mathematics in the workplace. Educ Stud 
Math (2012) 79:109–125. DOI 10.1007/s10649-011-9340-3. 
 
 
 
 
